Memory is a critical cognitive function, **and** theoretical frameworks such as cascade memory systems can help us understand the complex processes involved in memory formation and retention. Additionally, studies have examined the implication of individual nuclei on this function.

However, understanding memory formation and retention requires more than just analyzing the activity and dynamics of individual regions. Instead, it is crucial to focus on the collective cortical dynamics to comprehend the neural mechanisms underlying memory.

Therefore, to gain a more comprehensive understanding of how different brain structures and systems work together during associative learning, we propose studying collective cortical dynamics. This will be achieved by performing a data-driven analysis on whole-cortex vsdi datasets and whole-cortex Wilson-Cowan modeling.

--- 

Memory is a critical cognitive function 

AND 

Theoretical frameworks such as cascade memory systems are useful for understanding the complex processes involved in memory formation and retention 

Implication of individual nuclei on this function has been studied 

BUT 

Understanding just individual regions activity/dynamics during this complex cognitive process is not enough to understand the neural mechanisms underlying memory.

THEREFORE 

The crucial point is the understanding of memory consolidation focusing on collective cortical dynamics instead of individual nuclei. As it can provide a more comprehensive understanding of how different structures and systems in the brain work together during associative learning.

We will study collective cortical dynamics by performing a data-driven analysis on whole-cortex vsdi dataset and whole-cortex wilson-cowan modelling
