The brain is a complex, interconnected network of neurons. Neural activity flows through this network, carrying and transforming information to support behavior. Previous work has associated particular computations with specific spatiotemporal patterns of neural activity across the brain [1–3]. For example, sequential activation of primary sensory and then higher-order cortical regions underlies perceptual decision making in both mice [4] and monkeys [5, 6]. Similarly, specific spatiotemporal patterns of cortical regions are engaged during goal-directed behaviors [7], motor learning and planning [8, 9], evidence accumulation [10], and sensory processing [11]. Previous work has begun to codify these dynamics, either in the synchronous activation of brain regions [3, 12] or in the propagation of waves of neural activity within and across cortical regions [13, 14]. Together, this work suggests cortical activity is highly dynamic, evolving over both time and space, and that these dynamics play a computational role in cognition [15, 16]. However, despite this work, the nature of cortical dynamics is still not well understood. Previous work has been restricted to specific regions and/or specific behavioral states, so we do not yet know how neural activity evolves across the entire cortex, whether dynamics are similar across individuals, or how dynamics relate to behavior. This is due, in part, to the difficulty of quantifying the spatiotemporal dynamics of neural activity across the brain. To address this, we used mesoscale imaging to measure neural activity across the dorsal cortical surface of the mouse brain [17]. Then, using a convolutional factorization approach, we identified dynamic ‘‘motifs’’ of cortex-wide neural activity. Each motif captured a unique spatiotemporal pattern of neural activity as it evolved across the cortex. Importantly, because motifs captured the dynamic flow of neural activity across regions, they explained cortex-wide neural activity better than ‘‘functional connectivity’’ network measures. Surprisingly, the motifs clustered into a limited set of 14 different spatiotemporal ‘‘basis’’ motifs that were consistent across animals. The basis motifs captured the majority of the variance in neural activity in different behavioral states and in multiple sensory and social environments. Specific motifs were selectively engaged by visual and tactile sensory processing, suggesting the motifs may reflect core cortical computations. Together, our results suggest cortex-wide neural activity is highly dynamic but that these dynamics are low-dimensional: they are constrained to a small set of possible spatiotemporal patterns.

DISCUSSION Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Cortex-wide Activity Our results show that neural activity is highly dynamic, evolving in both time and space. Leveraging mesoscale calcium imaging in mice, we tracked the spatiotemporal dynamics of neural activity across the dorsal surface of the cortex. Using a convolutional factorization analysis, we identified motifs in neural activity. Each motif reflected a different spatiotemporal pattern of activity, with many motifs capturing the sequential activation of multiple, functionally diverse cortical regions (Figures 1, 2, and 3). Together, these motifs explained the large majority of variance in neural activity across different animals (Figure 4) and in novel behavioral situations (Figures 5, 6, and 7). A couple of the basis motifs captured patterns of activity observed in previous work, supporting the validity of the CNMF approach. For example, previous work has studied spatiotemporal waves of activity that propagate anteriorly to posteriorly across the cortex at different temporal scales [28–30]. Motifs 1 and 11 recapitulate these waves, along with their temporal diversity (motif 1 = fast, motif 11 = slow; Figure S3; Table S2). In addition to these previously reported motifs, we also discovered several additional, spatiotemporally distinct, anterior-to-posterior propagating waves (motifs 2, 4, and 9). Similarly, brain regions that were often coactivated in motifs were aligned with previously reported spatial patterns of coactivation in the mouse cortex [17, 31, 32]. For example, motifs 6, 8, 11, and 14 include coactivation of anterolateral somatosensory and motor regions. This pattern is observed often and reflects the close functional relationship between motor activity and somatosensory processing. Here, we extend this work by showing neural activity can flow within and between these networks in different ways. Relatedly, previous work using mesoscale imaging demonstrated that the mouse cortex exhibits repeating patterns of activity [11]. However, this work relied on identifying average patterns evoked by sensory stimuli (visual, tactile, auditory) and correlating the spatially and temporally static templates of those patterns to activity in resting animals. As we demonstrate, stimulus-evoked patterns capture considerably less variance in neural activity than the motifs, even in response to sensory stimuli themselves (15%–35% for stimulus responses versus 60% for motifs). Previous work has also used zero-lag correlations to show the brain transitions through different functional network states over time [3, 35–37]. Here, we show that these functional network states themselves have rich dynamics, reflecting specific sequential patterns of activity across the network. By encapsulating these dynamics, motifs are able to capture significantly more of the variance in neural activity compared to static networks. Furthermore, we found the spatial and temporal dynamics were not separable (Figure 3E), suggesting the previously identified static functional networks may have specific temporal dynamics associated with their engagement.

Motifs of Neural Activity May Reflect Cognitive Computations Each motif captured a different spatiotemporal pattern of neural activity. As neural activity passes through the neural network of a brain region, it is thought to be functionally transformed in a behaviorally relevant manner (e.g., visual processing in visual cortex or decision making in parietal cortex). Therefore, the dynamic activation of multiple regions in a motif could reflect a specific, multi-step ordered transformation of information. In this way, the basis motifs would reflect a set of ‘‘core computations’’ carried out by the brain. Consistent with this hypothesis, specific motifs were associated with specific cognitive processes, such as tactile and visual processing (Figure 5). In addition, the distribution of motifs differed across behavioral states (Figure 7) and in response to social and sensory stimuli (Figures 7 and S6). This follows previous work showing the engagement of brain networks is specific to the current behavior [38, 39] and that disrupting these networks underlies numerous pathologies [40–42]. Low-Dimensional Dynamics May Facilitate Hierarchical Control of Cognition Our results show that the dynamics of cortex-wide neural activity are low dimensional. Motifs identified in different animals and recording sessions clustered into a set of 14 unique basis motifs. This limited number of basis motifs captured the large majority of variance in neural activity (75%) across animals and across behavioral states. Such a low-dimensional repertoire of cortical activity is consistent with previous work using zero-lag correlations of neural activity to measure functional connectivity between brain regions in humans (e.g., 17 functional networks, [43]). However, the low dimensionality of cortex-wide activity contrasts with recent reports of high-dimensional representations within a cortical region. Large-scale recordings of hundreds of neurons have found high-dimensional (>100) representations within a brain region, with neural activity often representing small aspects of behavior (e.g., facial twitches, limb position, etc., [2, 44, 45]). The difference in dimensionality of cortex-wide and within-region neural activity may reflect a hierarchical control of information processing in the brain [46–50]. In this model, behavioral state changes slowly and reflects the animal’s broad behavioral goal [51]. Achieving these goals requires engaging a set of cognitive computations (e.g., tactile/visual processing during a social interaction). On a shorter timescale, control mechanisms engage one of these cognitive computations by directing the broad flow of neural activity across the brain [52]. In other words, the control processes activate a motif. Motifs then carry the local, high-dimensional representations between regions, allowing for representation-specific behaviors. In this way, by activating specific motifs, control processes can direct the broader flow of information across brain regions without having to direct detailed single-neuron representations. Future Directions Our approach has several limitations that motivate future research. First, although we capture a large fraction of the cortex, we are limited to the dorsal cortex and so miss out on lateral auditory cortex, cortical regions deep along the midline, and all sub-cortical regions. Second, though we probed activity in several different environments, imaging was always restricted to head-fixed animals. Third, the number and identity of motifs, as well as the relative contributions of spatial and temporal dynamics to variance in neural activity, are likely influenced by the nature of our approach. The relatively slow time course of GCaMP6f [18], and biases in the neural activity underlying the calcium signal [7, 9], may have decreased the spatial resolution and slowed the temporal dynamics. However, it is important to note that the spatial resolution used in our imaging approach (136 mm2/pixel) is higher than the broad activation of brain regions observed in the motifs and was high enough to capture pixel-specific information about stimuli. Furthermore, we could functionally distinguish 18 distinct regions (Figure S4E). Motifs engaged multiple of these regions, suggesting they were broader than the functional resolution of our approach. Furthermore, even given these constraints, the number of potential spatiotemporal patterns involving 18 regions is far higher than the 14 basis motifs found. In addition to addressing these limitations, future work is needed to understand the computations associated with each motif. Here, we’ve associated a few motifs with sensory processing. However, the computation underlying many of the motifs remains unknown—by cataloging motif expression across experiments and behaviors, we can begin to understand the function of each motif and gain a more holistic understanding of how and why neural activity evolves across the brain in support of behavior.