---
title: Replay, the default mode network and the cascaded memory systems model
authors: Karola Kaefer, Federico Stella, Bruce L. McNaughton, Francesco P. Battaglia
year: 2022
---

In recent years, two major experimental findings have highlighted the significance of intrinsic brain dynamics. At the level of neural ensembles and codes, memory replay — the spontaneous reactivation of activity configurations that occurred during previous, active experience — has been discovered. At the global brain dynamics level, resting-state networks — comprising sets of brain areas whose activities are markedly correlated during periods in which an individual performs no active task — have been identified. One resting-state network, known as the default mode network (DMN), has attracted much interest owing to its association with mentation and memory processes. 

The proposed link between replay and the DMN also calls for an update to current models of systems memory consolidation15,16. Complementary learning systems theory, also known as the ‘indexing’ model of systems memory consolidation, proposes that the brain holds two specialized learning and memory systems — one in the hippocampus (which acquires new information rapidly) and the other in the neocortex (with a vastly larger storage capacity) — and that the new information gradually merges into the schematic knowledge base by some (yet to be clarified) gradient descent optimization algorithm15. This theory suggests that the hippocampus generates a unique output code, or ‘index’, for each unique experience that serves as a direct associative link to the widely distributed lower-level cortical assemblies that encode the experience’s attributes to enable consolidation and retrieval.

In recent years, two major experimental findings have highlighted the significance of intrinsic brain dynamics. At the level of neural ensembles and codes, memory replay — the spontaneous reactivation of activity configurations that occurred during previous, active experience — has been discovered. At the global brain dynamics level, resting-state networks — comprising sets of brain areas whose activities are markedly correlated during periods in which an individual performs no active task — have been identified. One resting-state network, known as the default mode network (DMN), has attracted much interest owing to its association with mentation and memory processes. 

In the updated version of this theory that is presented here, which we refer to as the cascaded memory systems (CMS) model, we extend both the role of index code creation and the ignition of replay to a large network that encompasses the entire DMN (including the hippocampus). We suggest that replay of hippocampal index codes ignites brain-wide, attribute-rich representations of experience indirectly by cascading through a series of brain networks. This results in a hierarchical indexing system in which the brain regions that constitute each level have spontaneous, auto-associative dynamics and can both index representations stored in lower nodes (through a top-down process) and drive more global retrieval by triggering reactivation of higher-level indices (through a bottom-up process). We see the DMN as the hub of this cascaded replay and as a general, flexible and bidirectional way to link indices and attributes.

That is, hippocampal activity during sleep recapitulates sequences of place cell activations in the same order in which they occurred during maze traversals when the animal was awake29. Consistent with the idea that the hippocampus encodes an index for past experience, other variables (such as head direction) have also been shown to be encoded by sleep replay.

Subsequently, multiple lines of evidence showed that both the substrate and organization of memory changes with time. These findings, coupled with the earlier models, led to the formulation of systems consolidation theory, and replay was identified as a potential mechanism for information exchange between hippocampal and neocortical memory systems. Indeed, suppression of either SWRs or replay activity was shown to lead to memory deficits (Box 2). In its original and simplest formulation, systems consolidation theory posited a verbatim transfer of memory from the hippocampus to the neocortex during memory consolidation, which could account for some findings (such as the occurrence of anterograde amnesia following hippocampal damage).

Indexing theory, which was formulated later, does not assume that the detailed attributes of a memory per se are stored in the hippocampus in a self-contained fashion at any time51. Rather, it suggests that the memory consists of the linkage between hippocampus output patterns and widely distributed cortical attribute representations and that consolidation entails the maturation of cortical–cortical connectivity, thereby reducing the importance of the hippocampal index.

Memory replay is proposed to be the driver of this maturation, acting as a type of teaching signal for cortical plasticity. More recently, SWRs have also been reported in the neocortex, where they have also been linked to replay. Taken together, these data indicate that the contribution of replay to memory processes does not rely only on the hippocampus but involves the whole brain. Neocortical SWRs may synchronize autonomously triggered replay in the neocortex and therefore play an important role for remote memory retrieval. Evidence for such independent cortical replay in humans is provided by observations that SWRs are found across the neocortex (both during sleep and wakefulness) and occur simultaneously in many cortical locations. Furthermore, successful delayed memory recall was associated not only with increased hippocampal–cortical but also cortico-cortical co-occurrence of SWRs. The DMN. Temporally correlated activity patterns in distributed brain areas are thought to define functional networks. In addition to the correlated activity between brain areas that can result from simultaneous responses to a stimulus, spontaneously generated correlations have been observed during the resting state (that is, in the absence of a task or stimulus). 

Neuroimaging studies have identified several systems (collectively known as resting-state networks) that show such coherent spontaneous activity, including the somatomotor, visual, auditory and attentional systems. Voltage-sensitive imaging data from mice provided a similar picture but with a much better time resolution, and suggested that DMN (and in particular retrosplenial cortex) activation can both lag and lead hippocampal SWRs



---

The brain is dominated by spontaneous activity. Activity related to perception and behaviour changes brain energy consumption to a very limited degree when compared to the resting state1. This has led some theorists to view brain activity as being a closed, autonomous system, modulated rather than determined by sensory stimuli2. Thus, spontaneous activity to a large extent determines the outcome of stimulus processing. However, the detailed structure and function of this spontaneous activity remains somewhat mysterious. In recent years, two major experimental findings have highlighted the significance of intrinsic brain dynamics. At the level of neural ensembles and codes, memory replay — the spontaneous reactivation of activity configurations that occurred during previous, active experience — has been discovered3–8. At the global brain dynamics level, resting-state networks — comprising sets of brain areas whose activities are markedly correlated during periods in which an individual performs no active task — have been identified9.

One resting-state network, known as the default mode network (DMN)10, has attracted much interest owing to its association with mentation and memory processes. These two findings originated from very different fields and communities in neuroscience, namely those of hippocampal neurophysiology (mostly working on rodents) and of human cognitive neuroimaging. In this Perspective, we propose that there is an important link between replay and (amidst all of the resting-state networks that have been identified) the DMN and show that this is supported by anatomical, functional and theoretical arguments. The spatiotemporal scales at which the two phenomena are assessed as well as the techniques applied for their analysis are radically different, as are the questions typically asked in the two fields. From the functional point of view, the DMN has mainly been linked to recollection of past experiences or to self-referential mental activity11. Memory replay, on the other hand, has been seen as supporting ystems memory consolidation12,13 (the rearrangement of memories onto new anatomical and connectivity substrates for long-term storage) and the formation of general knowledge abstracted from related experiences (semantic memory14). However, recent methodological developments have produced results that suggest a link between the two phenomena, including similarities in their function, in the anatomical networks involved and in their dynamics. Taking this evidence into account, we here suggest that replay and DMN activity may actually be part of the same memory processing system, viewed through different lenses. The proposed link between replay and the DMN also calls for an update to current models of systems memory consolidation15,16. Complementary learning systems theory, also known as the ‘indexing’ model of systems memory consolidation15, proposes that the brain holds two specialized learning and memory systems — one in the hippocampus (which acquires new information rapidly) and the other in the neocortex (with a vastly larger storage capacity) — and that the new information gradually merges into the schematic knowledge base by some (yet to be clarified) gradient descent optimization algorithm15. This theory suggests that the hippocampus generates a unique output code, or ‘index’, for each unique experience that serves as a direct associative link to the widely distributed lower-level cortical assemblies that encode the experience’s attributes to enable consolidation and retrieval. According to this model, the role of replay is to enable exchange between the two memory systems, slowly blending in new information into neocortical storage and therefore preventing catastrophic interference17 (the complete loss of previously stored information as synaptic connections are overwhelmed) during the learning of new material. To achieve this, it is proposed that replay of new information (originating in the hippocampus) and of old information (originating in neocortex) must be interleaved15,18. In the updated version of this theory that is presented here, which we refer to as the cascaded memory systems (CMS) model, we extend both the role of index code creation and the ignition of replay to a large network.
that encompasses the entire DMN (including the hippocampus). We suggest that replay of hippocampal index codes ignites brain-wide, attribute-rich representations of experience indirectly by cascading through a series of brain networks. This results in a hierarchical indexing system in which the brain regions that constitute each level have spontaneous, auto-associative dynamics and can both index representations stored in lower nodes (through a top-down process) and drive more global retrieval by triggering reactivation of higher-level indices (through a bottom-up process). We see the DMN as the hub of this cascaded replay and as a general, flexible and bidirectional way to link indices and attributes. Another novel aspect of the CMS model is its emphasis on a feature of cortical dynamics known as ‘criticality’ (Box 1) as the carrier of information across the multiple levels of the model’s hierarchy. We here show that the CMS model can explain a number of recent experimental observations as well as provoking new testable predictions about brain activity and memory. Memory replay Memory replay was first discovered, and has been described in most detail, in the rodent hippocampus during sleep6,19. Hippocampal ‘place cells’ — each of which has different preferred firing locations within the environment in which the animal moves20 but is also modulated by other immediate sensory inputs21–23 and by ‘spontaneous’ internal states such as reward expectation24,25, working memory26 and action plans26 create output patterns that are unique to the current global experience. The replay of simultaneous6 and temporally ordered8 activity in pairs of hippocampal place cells during sleep was first described in recordings of large ensembles of hippocampal neurons. This was followed by the description of replay of more extended sequences, involving larger state trajectories and a larger number of hippocampal cells7 (Fig. 1a). The characterization of these more extended sequences of replay required the use of place decoding27,28, a statistical procedure through which the current position of an animal is extracted from the activity of recorded neuronal groups. By applying a decoder that was obtained from neuronal activity recorded as an animal ran along a maze to subsequent recordings made in the same animal during sleep, it was shown that the spontaneous activity occurring during sleep replays maze trajectories on a compressed timescale7. That is, hippocampal activity during sleep recapitulates sequences of place cell activations in the same order in which they occurred during maze traversals when the animal was awake29. Consistent with the idea that the hippocampus encodes an index for past experience, other variables (such as head direction) have also been shown to be encoded by sleep replay30. In the hippocampus, replay occurs preferentially during sharp-wave ripples (SWRs)31: large, compound, electrographic events in which a substantial number of n initial discussions of hippocampal replay during sleep15, the phenomena was linked to features of memory processes that had already been delineated in early models of learning and information storage39,40. Subsequently, multiple lines of evidence showed that both the substrate and organization of memory changes with time41–43. These findings, coupled with the earlier models, led to the formulation of systems consolidation theory15,44,45 and replay was identified as a potential mechanism for information exchange between hippocampal and neocortical memory systems15,46. Indeed, suppression of either SWRs or replay activity was shown to lead to memory deficits47 (Box 2). In its original and simplest formulation44,45, systems consolidation theory posited a verbatim transfer of memory from the hippocampus to the neocortex during memory consolidation, which could account for some findings (such as the occurrence of anterograde amnesia following hippocampal damage48–50). However, indexing theory, which was formulated later, does not assume that the detailed attributes of a memory per se are stored in the hippocampus in a self-contained fashion at any time51. Rather, it suggests that the memory consists of the linkage between hippocampus output patterns and widely distributed cortical attribute representations and that consolidation entails the maturation of cortical–cortical connectivity, thereby reducing the importance of the hippocampal index41,43. Memory replay is proposed to be the driver of this maturation, acting as a type of teaching signal for cortical plasticity5. A further significant advancement in the replay field took place when SWRs and replay were found to also occur during periods of wakefulness and in brain areas other than the hippocampus. Awake SWRs52 and accompanying replay53,54 occur sporadically during periods of task engagement, typically when an animal briefly pauses task-related behaviour at goal areas or choice points. The discovery that replay can occur outside sleep and can progress in both ‘forward’ and ‘reverse’ directions54 led it to be ascribed more functions. Besides its role in memory consolidation, it has been suggested that hippocampal replay during task periods may serve to recall memories, providing the building blocks for mental simulation, planning and evaluation55 (Box 2). The synchronous firing of many hippocampal neurons during SWRs provides a potent, synergistic signal that may help convey information to, or retrieve it from, other brain areas. Indeed, areas such as the prefrontal56,57, retrosplenial58, parietal59, visual60 and auditory61 cortices also often exhibit increased activity and replay in correspondence with hippocampal SWRs (Fig. 1b,c). More recently, SWRs have also been reported in the neocortex62–64 (Fig. 1d), where they have also been linked to replay63. Taken together, these data indicate that the contribution of replay to memory processes does not rely only on the hippocampus but involves the whole brain. The large body of findings from rodent studies that linked SWRs and replay with memory processes led to discoveries of similar phenomena in the human brain. In humans, SWRs were also first demonstrated in the hippocampus and adjacent areas of the medial temporal lobe and are positively associated with memory performance65,66. Since invasive single neuron recordings in humans are often not feasible, multivariate analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data has been used to demonstrate hippocampal replay, including replay of activity sequences, in humans in both sleep and wakefulness67–70. Replay studies in humans not only confirm many findings made in rodents but also provide strong support for the idea that cortical replay signals can occur independently of the hippocampus. Besides serving memory processes within the cortex and permitting interleaving of new and consolidated memories, a recent study has proposed that neocortical SWRs may synchronize autonomously triggered replay in the neocortex and therefore play an important role for remote memory retrieval64. Evidence for such independent cortical replay in humans is provided by observations that SWRs are found across the neocortex (both during sleep and wakefulness) and occur simultaneously in many cortical locations64. Furthermore, successful delayed memory recall was associated not only with increased hippocampal–cortical but also cortico-cortical co-occurrence of SWRs63,64,71. The DMN. Temporally correlated activity patterns in distributed brain areas are thought to define functional networks. In addition to the correlated activity between brain areas that can result from simultaneous responses to a stimulus, spontaneously generated correlations have been observed during the resting state (that is, in the absence of a task or stimulus). Neuroimaging studies have identified several systems (collectively known as resting-state networks) that show such coherent spontaneous activity, including the somatomotor, visual, auditory and attentional systems72. Like other resting-state networks, the spatially distributed brain areas of the DMN also display coherent activity at the slow (seconds) timescale of blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signals during the resting state73. The DMN, however, is unique compared to other resting-state networks because it reduces its activation when the individual is engaged in an active task (and is thus anti-correlated with the attentional network)73,74. As characterized in humans (using first positron emission tomography (PET) and later fMRI), DMN areas include subdivisions of the ventral and dorsal medial prefrontal cortex, the posterior cingulate (retrosplenial) cortex, the precuneus and the lateral parietal cortex10,75. The medial temporal lobe and the hippocampus have also been included in76 (or linked with72,77,78) the DMN. For example, spontaneous activity in the neocortical areas of the DMN correlates with that of the hippocampus79. The functional correlation structure between DMN areas is partially preserved during sleep80. This stability suggests that the DMN is, at least to some extent, state independent and consistent with known anatomical connectivity80. fMRI experiments performed under anaesthesia have provided evidence for the existence of a similar DMN in other mammals, including mice, rats, cats and monkeys78,81–83. A clear consensus on the function of the DMN is still lacking. Its discovery as a set of areas that increase their activity when individuals are not given a specific task meant that DMN activity was initially suggested to reflect unconstrained thoughts in the absence of monitoring of the external environment84. However, whilst many externally oriented tasks lead to BOLD deactivations in the DMN, it is now accepted that it is not only active during idle states. In fact, tasks that rely on internally constructed information actually increase DMN activation and activity in the DMN reflects the level of detail in subjective reports of experience during active tasks85. For example, studies that asked participants to recall personal past experiences found that the brain areas activated by this type of episodic memory recall overlap substantially with areas of the DMN86–88. Interestingly, other studies have shown that the brain regions that are involved in remembering the past are similar to those involved in envisaging the future89–91, perhaps because both cases require a simulation to be enacted independently of current inputs to the brain. It is also important to note that the notion that the DMN is a ‘task-negative’ network relies on correlations in BOLD signal measurements, which are most sensitive to the slow (seconds) temporal features of brain activity. Replay, which mostly takes place in bursts57 that last for a few hundred milliseconds at most, may remain undetected by such techniques. Indeed, DMN activation during replay was detected with magnetoencephalography (MEG), which can register fast transients92 (Fig. 1e), indicating that DMN activity, at least in some cases, may actually reflect replay. An animal correlate of the functions that have been ascribed to the DMN can be seen in the generation of activity sequences in the hippocampus that depict possible future trajectories55. Whether such activity reflects planning, or has merely a mnemonic function, is still debated93. In fact, both functions may be subserved at different times during awake replay94. Mental simulations are often rich in details and can therefore be hypothesized to depend on the link between index codes and the representation of the attributes of an experience. As mentioned above, the highest order index codes are presumed to be generated and stored in the hippocampus16,95. We can therefore hypothesize that the hippocampus may provide index codes that link to episodic memory content contained in other DMN structures (index–attribute connectivity), whereas horizontal interactions within the DMN reflect the organization of semantic knowledge (attribute–attribute connectivity). Such a layout could enable realistic mental simulations. The DMN has not only been linked to the recall of memories but also to their long-term storage. Baseline functional connectivity within the human DMN, including the hippocampus, was positively correlated with long-term episodic memory retention96 but not with short-term memory recall. Whether this relationship results from increased memory reactivation in individuals with higher DMN functional connectivity remains to be investigated. Furthermore, in the same study, individuals who showed better long-term episodic memory retention also showed stronger baseline decoupling of the DMN from perceptual and external attention networks. In summary, there is accumulating evidence that the DMN is not only active during passive states but also implicated in memory processes. Whilst cerebral blood flow-based imaging methods enable the entire brain to be imaged simultaneously, the temporal resolution is considerably lower than that achieved with electrophysiology. Interestingly, MEG studies adopting innovative analyses techniques showed transient activations97,98 (occurring at a much faster timescale than the fluctuations in blood flow signals from which the DMN functional connectivity was first mapped) that spanned specific networks of brain areas. Two of these networks overlapped closely with anterior and posterior parts of the DMN, indicating that DMN dynamics occur at both fast and slow timescales. Hippocampus–cortex interactions Besides facilitating replay, SWR bursts are likely to be an important conduit for interactions between the hippocampus and neocortex. During non-rapid eye movement (NREM) slow-wave sleep, neurons in multiple brain areas increase their firing activity coincidently with hippocampal SWRs99,100. SWRs during NREM sleep are also correlated with cortical sleep spindles101,102, 9–20-Hz oscillations in cortical activity that have been linked to memory consolidation103–105. During wakefulness, hippocampal SWRs have also been associated with increases or decreases in cortical activation106. Despite being associated with widespread brain activation during NREM sleep, SWR-related activations also retain a degree of specificity. A study combining resting state fMRI with electrophysiology in anaesthetized monkeys and rats revealed an overall increase in activation in most neocortical areas during SWRs compared to baseline periods but a decrease in subcortical structures (and, interestingly, also in primary visual cortex)107. Importantly, a re-analysis of the same data set showed that, during anaesthesia, the entire DMN is activated specifically and coherently with hippocampal SWRs108 (Fig. 1b). Voltage-sensitive imaging data from mice provided a similar picture but with a much better time resolution, and suggested that DMN (and in particular retrosplenial cortex) activation can both lag and lead hippocampal SWRs109 (Fig. 1c). Furthermore, the hippocampus has direct anatomical connections to DMN areas110,111 and, out of the resting state networks, makes preferential functional connections with the DMN (only the somatomotor network also shows activity correlations with the hippocampus)77. This supports the conclusion that the DMN has a privileged connection with the hippocampus and places SWRs as a potentially critical mechanism for this interaction. A recent MEG study has shown that cortical replay bursts coincide with transient activations of the DMN lasting tens of milliseconds92 (Fig. 1e). It is thus tempting to speculate that DMN activity may itself represent replay that was previously undetected due to the lower time resolution of methods typically used in DMN research. In fact, ensemble neurophysiology studies in rodents found evidence for replay in a number of DMN nodes. The medial prefrontal cortex is one of the main cortical recipients of hippocampal afferents and replay in this area was first detected during sleep56,57. Similar to hippocampal replay, medial prefrontal cortex replay takes the form of time-compressed, transient bursts of activity lasting 30–100 ms and recapitulating recent behaviour-related activity sequences. Furthermore, prefrontal replay transients preferentially co-occurred with hippocampal SWRs57, supporting the idea that SWRs contribute to information exchange between the hippocampus and the neocortex46. Replay has also been demonstrated in other structures, including the retrosplenial cortex58 and parietal cortex59,112 (both parts of the DMN). It is important to note that other cortical areas that are not part of the DMN also exhibit replay. The MEG study mentioned above92 (Fig. 1e) detected widespread replay across the brain, including in areas other than those encompassed by the DMN. Similarly, replay in visual60, auditory61 and motor113 cortices and other parts of the medial temporal lobe, such as the entorhinal cortex114,115, was also observed in rodent studies. It is therefore possible that the DMN provides the interface for hippocampalcortical interactions that enables replay to cascade throughout the brain116. Indeed, cortical voltage imaging reveals a SWR-associated spread of activation from the retrosplenial cortex to other ‘lower’ cortical areas109 (Fig. 1c). If this is the case, we can predict that replay in DMN structures will be best correlated with hippocampal replay and that the link between activity in the hippocampus and sensorimotor cortices will depend on DMN mediation, a hypothesis that could be tested using disconnection or inactivation techniques. A CMS model The foregoing results and concepts suggest that replay and DMN activation could be seen as expressions of the same mechanisms of spontaneous activity, subserving common computations. This assumption would have important consequences for our theoretical understanding of memory and of the role played by spontaneous activity and replay. As noted above, hippocampal replay was first linked to memory processes in the framework of systems memory consolidation theory. The complementary learning systems theory15 embodied this idea in a computational model with a deep (two-layer) neural network, in which the hippocampus is the lower layer and encodes memories as they are acquired in the form of unitary representations of events or percepts. The upper ‘cortical’ layer learns to detect the different components of the percepts and categorizes them. As noted above, replay was suggested to enable gradual offline training of the neocortical memory system to allow new and older memories to become associated. To achieve this, the hippocampus was proposed to act as an index that links the distinct attribute representations that make up an event and that are stored in different neocortical areas, enabling their concurrent reactivation16,39,40,117. It remains unclear, however, how a hippocampal index code that links anatomically distributed attributes can induce these correlations between distant cortical areas. During memory formation, the correlations are initially generated by simultaneous bottom-up activations induced by common causes. For example, the approach of a predator may cause perception of a fleeing group of conspecifics in the left visual field, a dark, threatening shadow in the far-right visual field, and a fox odour. These three distant representations must be reactivated in a coordinated fashion to become consolidated as one experience or integrated into a predictive schema. Correlated activations, often at long range, are also necessary to encode statistical regularities in the world (for example, that a fox odour predicts danger), which form the content of factual, semantic memories. Besides the distance constraints, these correlative states may be difficult to reach and sustain, and therefore to be strengthened by replay because of the relatively limited degree of inter-area connectivity in the neocortex as compared to its local connectivity118,119. As outlined above, the DMN is anatomically and functionally strongly connected and has a privileged functional link with the hippocampus. In addition, the DMN activates concurrently with brain-wide replay transients and many of its nodes themselves show replay. This makes it enticing to see the DMN as a conduit for interactions between the hippocampus (seen as the main generator of replay of new episodes) and areas of cortex not part of the DMN that support the reinstatement and consolidation of cortical memory representations. Furthermore, the DMN may even autonomously index and ignite replay of older episodes. This would provide the complementary learning systems theory with a solution for the ‘sparse connectivity’ problem outlined above and would leverage the location of the DMN in the second tier of a hierarchy of brain areas, within which regions are arranged according to their differential proximity to sensory input and the amount of information that they integrate (Fig. 2). In this hierarchy, which was recognized by Marr40 and others120–122, the DMN sits between the highest-order, episode-wide index codes in the hippocampus and the representations at the other end of the principal gradient that are more limited in scope. However, this still does not answer the question of how representations involving long-range interactions between cortical areas are learned in the first place and later updated. These representations are not only complex — in that they span, for example, multiple sensory modalities but also typically reflect the statistics of rare but significant occurrences, making it difficult for learning processes to tune connections and associate the different representations. A solution to this problem therefore requires an update to the complementary learning systems theory. We here provide this in the form of the CMS model, in which we suggest that replay is spontaneously and independently generated at multiple, hierarchically organized places in the cortex to enable learning and memory updating. The anatomical blueprint for the CMS model is provided by a seminal study120 that used nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques to show that variance in fMRI functional connectivity data from the human cerebral cortex may be largely explained by a principal gradient dimension (Fig. 2a) that sees DMN structures involved in autobiographical memory and semantic thought at one end and primary sensory areas involved in action and sensory perception at the other. The principal gradient mirrors differences in anatomical features of those areas such as spine density (Fig. 2b). According to this work, the DMN is better understood as a gradient (rather than as a single network), with DMN regions positioned further up the gradient processing increasingly integrated and associated forms of information. A very similar principal gradient can be extracted from mouse fMRI functional connectivity data123. Interestingly, in the mouse, the position of a given brain area on the principal gradient strongly correlates with its geodesic distance on the brain surface from the hippocampus. Importantly, the DMN also has dynamical features that would allow it to propagate replay to other parts of the cortex. In particular, DMN areas are capable of generating both reverberating activity on long timescales (Fig. 2c,d), facilitating temporal integration, and large activations (resembling a near-critical regime) that enable spatial integration124–129 (Box 1). Also relevant for our hypothesis is the discovery that activity in the hippocampus is closely coupled to that of DMN areas (Fig. 2e), which suggests that it lies next to the DMN in a continuation of the principal gradient77,123 (Fig. 2e). The CMS model (Fig. 3) makes a number of key assumptions and generates some testable predictions, as we discuss below. Replay propagates along a connectivity gradient. The CMS model suggests that replay propagates from the hippocampus along the principal connectivity gradient described above. Data supporting propagation of replay signals from the hippocampus to DMN nodes, such as the medial prefrontal, retrosplenial and posterior parietal cortices, already exist57,59,112,130,131. Replay has also been observed in primary sensory cortices found at the other end of the principal gradient, such as the visual60 and auditory61 cortices. In these cases, a link to hippocampal replay activity has been shown, but the intermediate steps in what is likely to be a multi-synaptic pathway from the hippocampus to these cortices are unknown. However, imaging studies that show that cortical activity correlates with hippocampal SWRs are strongly suggestive of the propagation of replay activity along the principal gradient107,108. In addition, MEG studies suggest that DMN activation precedes and possibly causes activation in other cortical networks98. The CMS model predicts that, although replay is a widespread phenomenon in the cerebral cortex (and beyond), DMN replay will be maximally correlated to hippocampal activity, areas just downstream of the DMN will be maximally correlated with the DMN, and so on. In other words, the correlations between replay in different brain structures will decrease as the distance between these structures on the principal gradient increases, which could be tested with neural ensemble recording techniques. Index codes exist at different levels. In the CMS model, both hippocampal activity and activity in DMN nodes (and nodes further down the gradient) provide index codes, which refer to and can activate activity configurations downstream. In support of this suggestion, fMRI experiments show that the multi-voxel pattern of activity in DMN areas can provide information about the global brain activity state132,133. The CMS model suggests that index codes in different areas will encode conjunctions of attributes that are themselves encoded in other areas by means of indirect association. These index codes may also link to lower-order index codes in other brain areas in a chain of referral links. Whereas the hippocampal index codes refer to unique episodic memories, DMN index codes are proposed to reflect knowledge of the potential causes (in our example, conspecifics fleeing from a fox) and implications (being in a life-threatening situation) of a given percept. That is, they represent the statistics of the world in terms of disentangled (or factorized) representations134, which in turn index the corresponding attributes (fur of conspecifics, fox odour) that they are composed of and that are stored in lower cortices. If this is the case, it should be possible to predict, from activity patterns in one area, the state and activity of areas downstream from it on the principal gradient (and this should include the prediction of long-range correlations between downstream areas). This could be tested using fMRI with multi-voxel decoding techniques in humans and with high-resolution invasive techniques in animals. Replay is independently ignited in a multitude of cortical areas. Replay is thought to be initiated and shaped by positive feedback induced by recurrent connectivity (for example, in the hippocampal CA3 area) amplifying inputs and spontaneous activity fluctuations135. The CMS model suggests that replay initiation is not restricted to the hippocampus and this is supported by the fact that many cortical areas (possibly all124) have sufficient intrinsic connectivity to support self-sustained activity. Top-down influences, from the hippocampus, for example, are therefore proposed to be responsible for some but not all replay events in downstream areas. Indeed, most replay events in the prefrontal cortex were observed in the absence of a corresponding hippocampal replay event130 and only a small fraction of replay events in the visual cortex coincided with events in the hippocampus60. Replay in the absence of hippocampal top-down influence may reflect generative reprocessing of correlations at lower hierarchical levels of the cascade and/or older, more consolidated memories (whose traces are stronger and can thus be reactivated independently of the hippocampus). Here, we suggest that (when representational complexity is made equal) newer memories will require the activation of replay at higher levels in the principal gradient than older memories (Fig. 3). The spontaneous initiation of replay in multiple foci may be tested experimentally using manipulations that inactivate the hippocampus or DMN structures. According to the CMS model, the complexity of the replayed information in a given event would be limited by the position of the highest involved area on the principal gradient. In addition, smaller replay events with a substrate low on the principal gradient should reflect older information, with a lesser integrative character. This could be measured by sampling activity from multiple brain areas and quantifying the ‘age’ and character of the replay information as a function of the extent of the brain territory covered by the replay event. Local, top-down and bottom-up influences on spontaneous activity. At each site in the brain, the CMS model suggests that spontaneous activity reflects three different factors: locally generated activity (that is, index code reactivation of that area), influences from higher-level index codes (generating correlations spanning multiple brain areas) and influences from areas further down the principal gradient (which can trigger higher-level pattern completion and thus drive the refinement and updating of the local index code). Locally generated activation would favour consolidation of the local memory trace and send messages both upstream and downstream. Top-down influences would help to shape inter-area connections and establish he link between the index code and the lower-level codes it refers to. Bottom-up influences may bias the re-activation of index codes, providing feedback useful for learning processes46. These assumptions may be tested: for example, replay may be observed in a given area while areas either upstream or downstream are inactivated and the corresponding changes in statistical features and information content may be characterized. Inactivating a hub area should, in our view, disrupt the connectivity between upstream areas. For example, inactivating the hippocampus may prevent a replay event started in the auditory cortex from spreading to the visual cortex and the integration of the multi-modal aspects of the memory of an episode. The effect should be stronger for a recent memory. Inactivation of DMN areas should produce similar effects but have stronger effects on older memories. Global replay takes the form of transient widespread activations. The CMS model proposes that replay-related activations propagate as neuronal avalanches and show the statistics of near-critical phenomena (a power-law distribution of avalanche sizes; Box 1). Contrary to previous theories, which emphasized a unidirectional flow of information from the hippocampus to the neocortex, the CMS model proposes that these two structures form one system that is dominated by feedback. Intra-area and inter-area feedback together generate widespread waves of activity, which, in some cases, involves most of the brain. The brain compensates for its relatively modest inter-area connectivity by working at the near-critical regime (Box 1), thus maximizing long-range correlations and amplifying the sparse, multi-synaptic connectivity between distant areas. Through this arrangement, avalanches may induce correlations between areas that are far apart on the principal gradient, resulting in linking of index codes that are not immediate ‘superiors’ or ‘inferiors’ of each other in the index hierarchy. We speculate that this could induce a massive acceleration of learning of complex representations. Areas that are higher up in the principal gradient would have the ability to generate larger avalanches (as suggested by computational studies considering anatomical connectivity and spine density124; Fig. 2b). To test the role of avalanches in learning and memory, it may be possible to manipulate activity in brain regions closer or further from the ‘critical point’ (for example, through closed-loop stimulation) and examine the effects on memory consolidation and neural activity. Conclusion The CMS theory delineated above synthesizes a large number of observations into a new functional view. It provides a framework to understand wide-scale data on global brain activity (as well as single-cell resolution data). For example, it could explain how brain-wide spatial representations136 (coordinated by the hippocampus137) arise and the role of mixed selectivity representations that appear in primary sensory cortices138. In addition, it could explain the emergence of semantic representations, which may constitute the building blocks for simulations of complex situations. Finally, it has the potential to facilitate a reconciliation between data from human individuals (where mesoscopic data combined with complex cognitive challenges is readily available) and animals (where information about neural codes at the microscopic level can more easily be collected). Clearly, the CMS model makes a number of hypotheses that lead to predictions that still need to be experimentally tested and examined more thoroughly theoretically. Three kinds of experiments will be key. First, functional inactivation and disconnection experiments may be used to investigate the bottom-up and top-down flow of information during replay. Second, it will be important to link data (on DMN activity, for example) obtained at the level of BOLD signals with that recorded using single neuron ensembles in order to determine whether co-activations in the DMN reflect replay that is at least partly coordinated by the hippocampus and whether that information is propagated to other cortical subnetworks. This process is still difficult and does not always provide unambiguous results; however, experiments involving multiple readout modalities (micro- and mesoscopic) linking the activity of ‘hub’ areas (using, for example, decoding techniques) may address this. Third, a question for both theoreticians and experimentalists is whether critical-like dynamics actually facilitate learning and consolidation. There are some models that have started to address this point (see, for example, reF.139), and experiments that modulate the critical state of the brain, either locally or globally, may help to support or disprove that idea. There are also limitations in the CMS theory that will need to be addressed. For example, the cortical ‘desynchronized’ regime of the awake brain does not show the same critical state as it does in the sleeping brain140; thus, it is unclear whether our theory could also apply to the awake state (when memories are encoded). It is possible that criticality is still present in the awake state but is limited to transient events or subsets of neurons, or that different dynamical principles are at play. Furthermore, in addition to memory, the DMN has a major function in planning and simulation, processes that are likely to involve awake replay (Box 2). While a theory that accounts for the contribution of replay to these functions may be closely linked to our memory model, significant adaptations are also likely to be needed. In summary, we have connected two research fields that, for the most part, have proceeded separately and employed different species and techniques and, to some degree, have followed different theoretical directions. By highlighting the commonalities in anatomy, function and activity dynamics present in the DMN and replay processes, we hope to foster new insights and open deeper interactions between these fields, with the aim of reaching a unified mechanistic account of memory, planning and simulation processes.
